Molecular evolution of the betagamma lens crystallin superfamily: evidence for a retained ancestral function in gamma N crystallins? Within the vertebrate eye, betagamma crystallins are extremely stable lens proteins that are uniquely adapted to increase refractory power while maintaining transparency. Unlike alpha crystallins, which are well-characterized, multifunctional proteins that have important functions both in and out of the lens, betagamma lens crystallins are a diverse group of proteins with no clear ancestral or contemporary nonlens role. We carried out phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary analyses of the betagamma-crystallin superfamily in order to study the evolutionary history of the gamma N crystallins, a recently discovered, biochemically atypical family suggested to possess a divergent or ancestral function. By including nonlens, betagamma-motif-containing sequences in our analysis as outgroups, we confirmed the phylogenetic position of the gamma N family as sister to other gamma crystallins. Using maximum likelihood codon models to estimate lineage-specific nonsynonymous-to-synonymous rate ratios revealed strong positive selection in all of the early lineages within the betagamma family, with the striking exception of the lineage leading to the gamma N crystallins which was characterized by strong purifying selection. Branch-site analysis, used to identify candidate sites involved in functional divergence between gamma N crystallins and its sister clade containing all other gamma crystallins, identified several positively selected changes at sites of known functional importance in the betagamma crystallin protein structure. Further analyses of a fish-specific gamma N crystallin gene duplication revealed a more recent episode of positive selection in only one of the two descendant lineages (gamma N2). Finally, from the guppy, Poecilia reticulata, we isolated complete gamma N1 and gamma N2 coding sequence data from cDNA and partial coding sequence data from genomic DNA in order to confirm the presence of a novel gamma N2 intron, discovered through data mining of two pufferfish genomes. We conclude that the function of the gamma N family likely resembles the ancestral vertebrate betagamma crystallin more than other betagamma families. Furthermore, owing to the presence of an additional intron in some fish gamma N2 crystallins, and the inferred action of positive selection following the fish-specific gamma N duplication, we suggest that further study of fish gamma N crystallins will be critical in further elucidating possible ancestral functions of gamma N crystallins and any nonstructural role they may have.